so David what is the latest
understanding of the Dark Matter problem
we don't know what makes up most of our
universe okay that's it we're done
here what about the famous monochromatic
Tic Tac that everybody saw there is
stuff out there like that that are just
amazing things we don't fully understand
why would the government hide this
government agencies leak and if anyone's
going to get more funding from the leak
it definitely leaks
that's the answer right
[Music]
there this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson your personal astrophysicist Chuck
Nice right here with me hey Neil all
right ma'am you know who we what we're
going to do today oh my gosh yeah okay
we got a good one we got a good one got
a good we got a good one you remember
what happened to UFOs they got rebranded
by the government to uaps yeah
unidentify
aerial phenomena yeah yeah and I I had
an inside guy on that operation just the
the fact that it came to the attention
of Congress let me introduce all of you
to my friend and colleague David spurgle
David pleasure to be here welcome to
Star Talk dude we came up together in
graduate school and we intersected more
thoroughly uh when I was a postto at
Princeton okay and he was on The Faculty
there and then became chairman and and I
knew him when he was just a scientist
now now he's running everything right
exactly I'm looking look at what my boy
is running what so you chaired NASA's
UAP unidentified AOL independent study
team you chaired that but that's not
you're president of the Simons
Foundation we'll get more into that
later you chaired the science definition
team for the Nancy Grace Roman telescope
okay we'll more about that if we have
time and you're also on a Bo the Board
of Trustees of the Carnegie Institute uh
for science Carnegie isn't that the same
group where Edwin Hubble work for them
Yep this is a long Legacy long and uh
really impressive tradition so David how
did you morph from Mr head honcho
scientist Big Man on Campus to alien UFO
guy for congress approached it the way
we approach scientific questions okay
approach it the way things we don't
understand so you look at the data you
have mhm and you realize much of the
data could be explained balloons drones
anything with flashing lights is an
airplane you know aliens who are coming
here who want to be hidden don't put
flashing lights on them right on their
UFO exactly like undercover cops they
don't like you don't see an undercover
cop in a marked police car Sir With
Sirens blazing and lights Flash in right
okay but but that doesn't preclude the
possibility that an craft would have
flashing lights in fact the mothership
in Close Encounters of the Third Kind
had tons of flashing lights was nothing
but flashing flashing lights it was like
a dog on Disco in the sky was It Disco
in the yeah I'm not sure flashing lights
really make sense for a spaceship okay
but anyway there's a bunch of things
that look when you look at them
carefully they're camera defects I think
we've all taken pictures of people where
the sun glint got in and ruined the the
picture correct so there something like
that flare lens flar right and then you
go through I think if that's happening
million times a day something in there
is going to be interesting you're going
to find Jesus in one of the one of the
lens flares right that's my religion and
then you look through that and then
there are some things we don't
understand okay right so there's some
events approximately what fraction about
a percent 1% 1% yeah all right okay so
about 1% of the events and the military
had a study that went through this we
used a lot of their work about 1% are
not understood wait can we back up for a
sec who appointed this committee uh NASA
NASA NASA NASA okay gotta so this is to
give advice to NASA on how they could
help Advance our understanding was this
requested by Congress uh no it was
requested by the head of NASA okay so
NASA want to play in the sandbox yep yes
okay mm and NASA is among the most
transparent agencies absolutely and they
have no reason to they don't have an
agenda there was nothing about our study
that was classified I have no clearances
MH so we can talk openly about
everything we did and we looked at what
the events that we didn't understand
when you have the highest level of
clearance that's what you would say you
say I don't have any clearance but I
don't have any c that's exactly what a
high clearance person would say no go on
um the data was ambiguous we didn't
understand it but it wasn't like it was
something clear and one of the points we
made was a scientists again this is the
1% that we don't know what they are yeah
yes okay yeah no and when you don't
understand something you don't jump to
the most exciting conclusion right you
don't say it's got to be aliens I you
know you look at it and say something I
don't know but you don't ignore it
either right you should not ignore
things you don't understand if there are
things you don't understand what do you
want to do get better
data and that really was our message to
NASA if they wanted to contribute to
this they should help get better data
right now everyone is carrying in their
back pocket a device that takes really
high quality digital images yes
accurately records the time yes measures
GPS position correct measures the local
magnetic field make measures the local
gravity Invitational field did you do
all that it does all that you that's why
it knows how you're orienting your phone
clearly that's not an
Android so hey I've got an iPhone I
think but and there are billions of them
around the planet what you're saying
when I when it knows which way is North
is it using the magnetic north or is it
correct it's got a correct for that it's
got a correct okay so knows where I am
on Earth corrects for the magnetic
anomal is what we call it and then it
giv you the true north the true north
good okay yep and gets it it is really
amazing what that device measures your
pH and if you can imagine if we had
pictures of something we didn't
understand taken by citizens from a
whole bunch of different perspectives
you canines different sight lines you'll
be able to reconstruct the event okay to
know how fast the object is moving how
far away it is and not be susceptible to
someone's capacity to interpret what
they see that's right not a single
blurry image but tens of high quality
images MH and you don't have to worry
about things like camera flares because
you've got multiple IM and multiple
images so our recommendation to NASA was
to develop an app and to develop there
an app for that oh my gosh okay what's
it the app it doesn't exist yet so this
was our recommendation that they fund
the development of something like this
uh and that they use this to collect
more data so I'd have the the app on my
phone I see something I don't understand
I take a picture and the metadata in
that image I just upload it to the app
to the app in some simple way do you
want it simplified as much as possible
and then that goes to a central place
and then you can have people there that
can
coate the and correlate the data and we
said just try to make everything public
so you're crowdsourcing the data
Gathering itself yep okay so I people
are everywhere people are everywhere and
I felt this was teachable moment a
chance to say what do we do as
scientists we collect data we verify
data we check data quality I did a bunch
of TV interviews on this soon as I
started talking about checking data
quality they ended the interview they
wanted to hear about yeah yeah don't be
so boring dude but it's like you want to
make sure that people didn't put in fake
images I just love it he's just like of
course we uh gather data we check data
quality they were like this guy has
Integrity get him the hell out of
here no but what what you're saying is
in an era where we have Photoshop and
and even more Advan and even AI
generating images you want to make sure
you need some way to authenticate yeah
what the camera caught and that didn't
even occur to me see how I I'm I'm
thinking yeah you take a picture but the
fact is that those Photoshop type
programs they exist on your phone you
don't have to actually go right like you
could just hit a button on your phone
and start manipulating an image right
you had to go take it import it some to
to your computer mess with it and put it
back out no now you can just do it right
when you take the picture so that makes
sense no I mean it's not hard to take a
picture shaking the hand of a friend and
replace the picture of the friend with I
don't know Dr Spock whoever your your
favorite alien is that would be
mine Spock was half alien I think that's
true half mother was uh on this show we
have to be very accurate about that Mom
was human dad was I'm saying that's all
I'm saying so you presented your results
more than a year ago what has happened
since then you know NASA's considering
developing these things to do that needs
new money oh yeah okay little partt of
money and last year was a very tough
year for NASA's budget all right NASA
took a huge budget cut I remember that
yeah so they had to cancel programs yes
so were not about to start something new
uhhuh I mean when we started they
thought there'd be some new monies from
Congress they'd be able to say here's a
program that would we would go to the
community and we thought about that as
like here's something NASA could do that
would involve citizens yeah and they
just at a time at which they were
cancelling missions they just did not
want to do anything that's really a
shame but at least it's it's on the
radar y that it's something to do money
then becomes available okay in a way
don't you think that's a big mistake
because here's what I'm picking up from
what you're saying you are
immediately uh enlisting the public and
getting people to focus on NASA you're
getting them excited about the one thing
that every everybody can agree is it's
is exciting which is are we being
visited and you're saying okay here's an
app get involved like I would I would
take money from someplace else and put
it into that yeah but we also said which
I think is true we did not see any
convincing evidence for the existence of
aliens okay now see there's your problem
you didn't
lie and you know not seeing convincing
evidence doesn't mean it doesn't exist
but that means there's no convincing
evidence absolutely I know you very well
as not only a friend but as a fellow
astrophysicist so we have very strong
overlap in our training and our brain
wiring you don't want everyone on the
committee to have exactly that same
brain wiring so who else was on the
committee what what was the nature of
their expertise and who selected them I
was selected by NASA I was involved in
advising as committee chair who was
there so we had a pretty diverse set of
people coming from
oceanography atmospheric science but
there's a lot of atmospheric phenomenon
so experts on the ionosphere some
science policy people the ionosphere a
layer of the upper
atmosphere that is IED yeah yeah that's
where we get the Northern Light
does that happen in iere well may even
be higher it do doesn't but it starts
there and it go goes ion spere is
usually above that right so the a lot
Northern Lights are usually a bit lower
but it's you know connected phenomena
okay MH and and certain radio
frequencies of radio WS reflect off of
the ionosphere interesting things can
happen with the ionosphere that wouldn't
happen in any other layer oh yeah it's
pretty wild okay so go on so we had some
people from the intelligence Community
mhm right because they have a lot of
satellites looking down okay M so they
would have had clearance even if you
didn't that's right yes okay we had in
their own business in their own business
we had some people from um technology
companies good right who were familiar
with some of the uh Technologies out
there some of the things we can use from
space to look down and see what was
going onh we had to Al so some thought
went into this encouraging lots of
different perspectives around the table
it was actually a really good group of
people that I learned a lot from as
we've learned from day Avid and his team
one of the most exciting things about
scientific discovery is that even when
we don't find all the answers the
process can bring us closer to the truth
take this recent Trappist one study for
example scientists completed the longest
search for signs of alien technology and
although they didn't find any their
effort established a new method for
future searches being open to new ideas
and always refining your research is the
most important lesson here something are
longtime Partners at Ground news really
help with they're a small team led by a
former NASA engineer dedicated to adding
Clarity to an often contradictory media
landscape by calculating how credible
every Source reporting on a story
actually is with very high being the
gold standard of responsible journalism
all the way down to very low so you can
easily distinguish fact from fiction and
if you want to dive even deeper ground
news daily briefings break down the
day's top stories by clearly
highlighting facts points of agreement
and even opposing views exposing
yourself to diverse viewpoints ensures
you're not just critically informed
enough to think you're right but to even
challenge your assumptions and grow so
if you're just as curious as us
subscribe to ground news today or give
this to someone you know we're giving
our viewers 50% off their unlimited
access Vantage plan their biggest
discount of the year just go to ground.
news/ StarTalk or scan the QR code we
really can't recommend them enough now
let's get back to the show all right so
you had your role in the hearings but
did you watch all the rest of the
hearings I watch some of it but not
everything yeah do you have any thoughts
or Reflections there are some amazing
things that came out that were fun to
watch I don't know if you remember these
bodies that were of alien that were sh
to the Mexican the Mexican Parliament
meican mummies the NASA mummies in
Mexico put on display they're like 3
feet tall right and there's like two or
three of them yeah yeah and they were
like that came out while you this that
came out while we were doing it yeah and
that was um one of these things you look
at and say wait a second if you actually
have something that you think is
interesting what you should do with it
is send samples around mhm right like
you know send the samples to 100 labs
around the world and if it's not human
DNA we'll find out quickly without the
bias that might be inherent in who
produced The Bodies right but in
addition when I saw that I said that's
exactly what we should be doing if we
have crashed alien bodies we should put
them on display but no one did that in
the testimony everyone kept saying those
who claimed it existed said it's in a
lock box and then you can't come and
look at it I thought to myself an alien
in a lock box that you're not showing
anybody is the same thing as no alien
you're scientifically is the same thing
so how can can I ask something old I
mean to both of you yeah what would be
the impetus for not showing the fact
that these aliens exist why would the
government hide this if you know because
conspiracy theorists have their own you
know but but why I'll I'll turn it
around go ahead I've worked with
government agencies for a long time
government agencies
leak and if anyone's going to get more
funding from the leak it definitely
leaks so I'm running that's the answer
right there so like I am running a lab
that had some secret alien stuff if it
leaks and there's lots of information
and the alien bodies are shown I get
more funding of course so one of the
reasons that I don't believe the
conspiracy theorists is I trust people
to look out for their own economic
self-interest and you know the
government leaks everything all the time
my favorite quote is from Ben Franklin
from poor Richard Almanac yes he said
three people can keep a secret if two of
them are
dead that there it is the foundational
documents of the country that's it right
um so but why didn't they bring forward
what maybe they don't exist oh okay
right yeah okay so the big concern is
there could be some kind of alien
technology that is so far beyond us that
it could pose a security risk and you're
saying even in the 1% of the things you
could not explain there was nothing
there that whoa this could be uh future
technology cuz think about what anything
today that's flying through the air
would look like to anybody 100 years ago
so it doesn't take much time Delta to
possibly freak someone out right about
how advanced you are so that's part of
the story of Area 51 right which was we
were our military was developing
Advanced Technologies and those were
Secrets this is a cold war Cold War and
think about drones imagine you saw a
drone
25 30 years ago right never seen one
right just just moving just moving in
any direction that it went up down any
all along any axis any axis instantly
instantly yes you would think a Dr and
with no human in control right you would
think a drone that we're totally used to
is an alien spaceship mhm right and you
know so there's Technologies out there
if you look at a lot of the reported
events there are a number of them that
were those events associated with things
seen by military pilots and you have to
ask yourself who is going to be trying
to see what our military Pilots are
doing they fly all the way here from
some other planet to study our planes
deployed outside of
Taiwan or is it the Chinese and one of
the things that came out during our
study may remember this Chinese balloon
yes right we love the Chinese balloon
yeah right so
it is very
clear that the United States we shoot it
down we shot it down it we shot it down
the United States is spying on the
Chinese military the Chinese are spying
on the US military this is like their
job right and so we part of the security
value of monitoring and and getting this
information as I if I remember correctly
back in was it the 60s the government
did not dis sow UFO sightings they
wanted to promote people's awareness of
them in case they saw something that
Russia was sending over and then we get
firsthand knowledge because people are
everywhere and the military isn't and so
there were strategic value to this in as
far as the military is concerned would
is that still the case you know you look
at the war in Ukraine yeah and both the
ukrainians and the Russians
are relying on citizens uh following
drones they've got apps on their phones
that's right when you see a drone fly
over so they know to shoot it
down yeah so where are we now in this
why were there still hearings just a few
weeks ago a year after these other
hearings when I thought everything got
aired as much as it needed to be you
know I think people like
conspiracies people want to believe mhm
yeah they do and um people are not
comfortable with ambiguity right to say
you know we look at lots of data and
there's a few things we don't understand
they'd rather jump to some exciting
conclusion than justor it makes you feel
better though you know every science you
hit something you don't understand that
excites us right we don't immediately
come up with an explanation we we might
have an hypothesis but not without
justifying it with more data or better
data I mean let's be honest most people
are not scientists most people see a
splotch on a piece of toast and they're
like it's Jesus so let's be honest I've
seen some pretty good Jesus renderings
though there some good ones there's been
some good ones you it's Renaissance
Jesus though well always always that's
what he was most painted probably yeah
you know Jesus in most of those
paintings looks like he's from the local
town There's a lot a lot of blonde
jesuses right yeah that's so funny yeah
you never get afro Jesus afro Jesus
doesn't on the piece of toast pull the
toast out the toaster oven I couldn't
believe it afro Jesus since Jew Jesus
was Jewish it'd be a Jewish afro it
would be right that's how that would
have happened definitely now in our
field we in science in general we
greatly devalue eyewitness
testimony if we have another way of
obtaining the data with UFOs it's kind
of only eyewitness testimony because it
comes upon you not when you're already
with measuring equipment and so apart
from the smartphone what else does
someone have to offer you but the
eyewitness testimony that they've
experienced you know eyewitness
testimony is just not very reliable I
mean this is something that we've
learned about talking to a black man
here just saying yeah so there's a lot I
mean this isn't aliens right this is
just a lot of court cases of people who
were unjustly convicted positively
identified positively identified by
eyewitness by eyewitness and then and
and even without malicious intent
sometimes malicious but most times not
just people going no that's him that's
the or because they were shown something
shown a picture lights on no actually
right right I was three blocks away you
know and there's just lots of problems
with eyewitness testimony and I think
this is actually more important for
understanding things in the context of
our justice system mm
than for UFOs right of course right but
we have cameras and we don't only have
cameras we have um early warning radar
systems I mean when we step back and
think about what data does the military
have what data does the scientific
Community have we are monitoring space
and the environment around us all the
time and I further add to that I think I
ran the numbers on this there's a
million people at any given moment who
are airborne with a window right sitting
next next to them that's right and so if
the mothership is coming we can totally
crowdsource that we also monitor
everything coming into the solar system
right so if there is something big
coming into the solar system this guys
have more power than I knew we'd see it
yes well we certain the military
certainly monitors everything flying
into the US right you cannot fly a plane
from you know Europe to the US without
uh someone noticing mhm right right so
we're monitoring a lot around us so we
do know a lot about our
environment and as we go through all of
that data and you know lots of people
have done this there isn't any
convincing
evidence of Advanced Technologies beyond
what we have so what about the famous
monochromatic Tic Tac that everybody saw
of the the F18 Navy Pilots that reported
and you hear them oh my gosh what is
that it's an orbit and it's and it's
moving right so we don't know the
distance to the object mhm um why not
don't they have
tools that get distan to they need a new
airplane if they can't know I'm sorry
well no they don't you know the the data
quality for those events were not
terrific you'd like to have more
measurements those you know I said
there's a per you know there's a percent
or so that we don't understand that is
like absolutely part of that right that
is that is that one that's one of cerce
of that's one of the centerpiece ones
and you look at and say that's
strange next thing you think is let's
get some more data how far away is that
how fast is it moving right right could
that be explained by conventional
Technologies by balloons far away is
there something normative it could be we
don't know we need better but the data
we have is pretty um I heard someone in
the security space
suggest that would wouldn't this
restricted airspace be an ideal place
for the military to just put an
anomalous object into the sensors to
just see how their pilots react mhm a
scrimmage test scrimmage oh yes
yes what they do see what they do do try
to shoot at it do they are they puzzled
by it if that did happen then they don't
want to tell anybody that that's what
they happened because part of the
reaction is part of what they're looking
to find out how it happened right yeah
the whole thing is to a stress test
you're trying to figure out okay how are
we going to respond and so you create
the circumstances where you can measure
your own response to something yeah and
one of the things to keep in mind about
actually both military and commercial
pilots their job is not to investigate
funny things out their window right if
you're a United pilot flying from New
York to Chicago you see something weird
out your window you go and announce to
the to the people on your plane we're
going to be an hour late going into
Chicago I'm going to circle around and
look at that weird object from some
other side that is your last day of the
p and if you're a military pilot you are
being timed constantly right on how fast
you get from point A to point B you are
not trained and your sensors are not set
up in a way to collect data it's not
Star Trek right like to to boldly go to
to seek out new life out new life no and
new civilizations yeah cuz every minute
you're up there there's millions of
dollars that cost millions of dollars to
keep you up in the air the military's
job is to protect the country right
their job is not to study unidentified
scientific phenomenon right that's
that's NASA's job tell me about this new
phenomenon that was identified by the
crowdsourced by crowdsourced
observations of phenomena in the sky so
one really interesting phenoma are
Sprites tell me about it so lightning
Sprites are something that that's a new
flavor s yeah no it's it's basically
upward-going lightning 10 times more
common than regular lightning
Pilots would report seeing this stuff
but they were so fast that people
dismissed it and it turns out to be a
really common and phenomenon and go into
images Google type in lightning Sprites
SP r i r t like the old softare like
okay you'll see amazing images and these
images were dismissed until we developed
the Technologies to get fast enough
that we can get lots of images of
Sprites wow oh because they're very
transitory they're really fast so it's
very hard to oh what is that and you get
your camera it's gone gone okay so the
crowdsourcing or encouraging people to
document what they see in whatever way
they
can whether or not we discover aliens we
might discover new science I mean
there's some amazing things out there
like St Elmo's Fire or that's a movie
that's a movie it's a good movie
nostalgic you know we show our age but
like um well wait so Sam no's fire is
the discharge at the top of a ship's
mast and it was glow and every say oh
that's beautiful no dude you're about to
get hit by lightning
lightning say goodbye Saye so yeah can
you explain ball lightning please I I've
heard of it I've never even seen like
pictures of it but so it's it's a ball
of ionized plasma so like gas that's so
hot that there's free electrons moving
around okay it persists for a while like
one of the scary things that I've heard
of is like you're there was an incident
on an airplane where this ball of
lightning rolled down the aisle of the
plane and then left how'd it get in the
plane it came in a window or the side I
don't know the plane is a closed it has
a travel
agent it wanted first class wait wait I
just understand something the plane is
made of metal how you going to move
ionized material through metal I
actually don't know how it got in I mean
there's a report and again this is
something where eyewitness work as you
can you work as you can a plan on some
level is almost a faraday cage yeah
right and people have reproduced this
phenomenon it might be a tangled magnet
piece of magnetic field with a plasma on
it we don't quite so ball lightning I'm
not expert on this my understanding is
it's still not well understood okay okay
so there's you know there is stuff out
there that like that that are just
amazing things we don't fully understand
so I'm going to paraphrase Hume I think
it was in the on the subject of Miracles
where it was the likelihood that it
could be some new law of physics you're
witnessing is greater than the fact that
it's actually a miracle that is that
transcends physics itself transcends the
law of physics itself right so in this
case if we're going to see a phenomenon
that is just completely weird and we
never had the way to capture it before
it's more likely a natural phenomenon
that's new to us than visiting space
aliens who were eavesdropping I think as
scientists we should be guided by
wonderful quote by Galileo measure
what's
measurable and figure out how to make
measurable what you can't measure oh oh
wow look at that that's a great that's
great okay that's not his best quote
though okay you want you got one better
yeah go ahead the Bible tells you how to
go to heaven not how the heavens go oh
you can wrap that up y let me tell you
something that's that's a mic drop right
there that's a m
yeah that's a good one all right so
David we got the smartphone is there
some other ideal device you can imagine
deploying to for people that would get
better data than the cell phone itself I
think I would really start with the cell
phone CU we don't know what the
phenomena is right so you don't invent
some new expensive technology when
everyone's carrying a cell phone around
in their pocket but but as astrophysics
we we invent new kind of telescopes all
the time they have new detectors and so
even if we don't know what the detector
is going to find so why deny something
similar to the public cuz how are you
going to put that in the hands of
everybody because I think from carry 100
inch telescope on your
back yeah I know one of the big concerns
I have right now is this issue of
scientific trust interesting right
people don't trust scientists they think
things are hidden right I feel it's
important to also address the question
of like the sense of conspiracy the
sense of Something's hidden and that by
involving the public in acquiring data
looking at data understanding the most
transparent thing you can do you want to
be transparent you want to be open espe
when there's a sense of of hidden
conspiracy I think that's great okay so
I have a very bad segue MH things that
are hidden from us that we want to
reveal one of the longest unsolved
problems in astrophysics is dark matter
and there's a telescope soon to be
launched the Nancy Grace Roman telescope
did I say that right remind me who she
is so she was a lady on HLN she uh
talked a lot about crime
I'm sorry go ahead I I couldn't help
myself so Nancy Grace Roman was the
first head of astronomy at Nasa oh cool
oh so she was one of the really early
Pioneers just to remind people NASA
launches things into space and conducts
science as a whole separate kind of
advocation for the agency so somebody
can head the astronauts go into space
and a different person is heading the
science okay so think about the person
responsible for things like the Hubble
telescope in modern times in modern
times you know she did some of the first
things that would the the precursors to
the Hubble telescope the precursors to
the James web Space Telescope right so
you know just like there were the
Mercury astronauts right at the time
you're doing the Mercury astronauts she
is thinking about and leading NASA's
efforts to start to do astronomy MH and
so uh what is that telescope tuned to
detect so it
what's your role on that telescope so I
helped lead the science team for it when
we started I helped lead the design of
it I kind of was one of its uh early
Advocates to make the case first to the
scientific community and then to NASA
and Congress that we should we don't do
anything El we have very good buyin from
the whole Community we're very we're
pretty tight in that way I'm very proud
of us is that to avoid infighting
yes no if we infight it's only among
ourselves but when we have to beg for
money right we're pretty tight you got
to be tight we're tight on that and it's
going to basically map the entire Sky
mhm with the resolution of the Hubble
telescope holy crap so you've seen these
Hubble images and they're just amazing
yeah imagine you can map the whole sky
that way MH so it's a Hubble quality
image but a much bigger field of view it
could see much more and it's more
Advanced Technologies so it'll let us
map the whole sky so what's the
difference between that and the ver ruin
telescope which which also has very wide
field mapping of the sky right so the
ver rubben telescope will operate in the
optical mhm um it'll doible light
visible light it will do amazing things
but it is still limited by our
atmosphere so this will be in space so
it'll operate in the
infrared it will be sensitive it'll be a
very nice complement actually to the and
as a reminder infrared doesn't make it
to Earth surface very nicely so and it
doesn't make space yeah doesn't make it
to the Earth's surface and lots of
things in the Earth's atmosphere are
glowing in the infrared so you really
gain a lot by going to space and you'll
have much sharper images yeah and I
think its Legacy will be incredibly
broad because you map the whole Sky
we're going to discover stuff we hadn't
expected I mean whenever you point your
telescope in New Directions and new ways
you are nature surprises us plus I have
to put something to rest here there are
many people who think that you miss
something if you don't expect it right
okay you only will see what you expect
right as a scientist if there's
something I don't expect that's the
first you see oh it's like oh my gosh I
don't know what that is you don't have
search bias it is something I've never
seen before Oh My Gosh looking for your
keys and you missed the
$20 so I an example I think of is you
will come and visit it New York City you
come to New York because you want to see
the tree lighting at Rockefeller Center
okay and that's like your plan I'm going
to go there and that experience is
worthwhile and you see it and that's
like we design the telescope to study
dark matter we design to study nature
Dark Energy there's some particular
things we're going after but as you go
to Rockefeller Center the best part of
that trip to New York might be someone
rapping that you hear in the subway it
might be some person you happen to meet
it might be the bar you might be Elmo
hopefully might Elmo
and it might be some band you heard at a
bar that you went to late at night yeah
and yes you went to go to Time Square
that like you know when you made your
airplane reservations you planned around
getting to the lighting of the Christmas
tree MH but it's everything what was
unexpected ended up being so much better
yeah yeah and that's or more interesting
more interesting you know in some ways
that's been the history of astronomy
okay if you've never seen the Christmas
tree at Rockefeller Center and the
lights on Fifth Avenue in the stores go
it's worth going even if you're Jewish
go yeah it's interesting no I I say that
as a Jew
okay uh and I was in one of the panels
that was establishing
scoping what the expected science would
be from the Hubble telescope okay
because we're old enough we predate the
telescope itself and so you're not going
to design a telescope and you unless you
have a plan for what this sucker is
going to look at and what it's going to
questions it's going to answer if you
look at that document today most of why
we remember the telescope has nothing to
do with anything that was forecast for
it right most of it and that's the Real
Testament to a fertile
uh bit of scientific instruments right
so there's a clear difference then of
course between the ver Ruben telescope
which is groundbased which means NASA
has nothing to do with it we just have
groundbased money and groundbased people
doing it all over the world and the
Nancy Grace Roman telescope spaceborn
telescope which is now it's just amazing
we can just speak of that casually
another space another Space Telescope
yeah that's great exact oh my gosh very
cool now the we're not the only players
in town we got Europe European Space
Agency Isa that what are they working on
right now so Issa launched uclid it's up
there in space now uclid it does many
things in some ways it's a smaller
version of the Nancy Grace Roman
telescope okay it's up there it's not as
sensitive its resolution isn't as good
but it's still the most powerful thing
we've had up to now and it's operational
right now it's operational now it's
taking data now they are still
calibrating and understanding the data
they have not made most of the the data
they're taken available yet they will
just to be clear when you have data any
data you have has to be calibrated
without calibration the numbers mean
nothing right right it's a it's a very
big part of what we do trying to weigh
yourself well if you don't know if you
just get a scale and just throw Springs
you have no idea what what are you
calibrating against and the Press never
talks about it the public doesn't know
anything about it and it's half of our
effort to calibrate and characterize
data interesting not his he was a
theorist well no I I I invited him to
the telescope in Chile when when I was
doing my PhD thesis he's a theorist
there was an earthquake not just a
earthquake a level SE RoR 7 earthquake
and it threw my spectrograph off The
Thing I Got Dat I don't know what I was
looking at and I said so these are the
Observer Gods saying we don't want
theorists up here with
us you just blamed him for an earthquake
yes I did I'll take full responsibility
what the hell were you doing there
anyway I forgot I went for fun there you
have it all right you can't you cannot
you cannot argue with that answer
ever okay so uh uclid is actually a
collaboration between NASA and Isa and
that's your how you can get connected to
ukl as you are and you know a lot of
these things NASA and Isa work together
MH so NASA built the infrared detectors
that r that ride on it okay okay and
with the James web Space Telescope one
of the most important instruments was
built by the Europeans all right so we
really do work together when we can
that's a science thing because
politicians haven't figured that out yet
yeah unfortunately just saying this is
why you guys should be running the world
but you're too busy doing your
science so David we came of age where
just before us there were The Observers
and the theorists and the theorists you
give him a pencil and a pad and The
Observers would go off the telescopes
and then the power of computing became
manifest to both branches of our field
and the theorists started using
computers The Observers started
analyzing data more thoroughly more
quickly and so does comp the phrase
computational
astrophysics means something specific
and different from how that evolved out
of those two branches it's basically
those two branches so when we did
theoretical work and started from how we
thought the universe began worked it
forward to predict what galaxies were
like we did what we could by pet and
paper mhm and then you reached a point
where things start to get complicated
and we couldn't carry out those
calculations so we started to you do
what you can you do what you
can
and so you start to rely on computers
to let you do calculations that you
couldn't do otherwise mhm and those
computers have gotten more and more
powerful so we can now do detailed
simulations of how stars form how they
evolve how they explode so they're not
just comp you're not just Computing
formulas you are running simulations of
the Universe on time scales that we
don't live long enough to see wow and
you can do it on the computer that's see
that's awesome no it is you know what
happened in our lifetime I got to tell
let me tell the story just in the
generation before us there was a very
important Observer chip ARP was his name
Halton ARP is his whole name and he
compiled a volume of galaxies that just
looked weird okay and it was called the
atlas of peculiar galaxies cool and they
were a trove of if you wanted to study
things that were just different right
from the nor you you pick objects out of
that catalog and bring a different kind
of telescope it but no one knew how they
came to be what are these things is this
a new kind of formation process in the
universe cuz they're all just weirded
oddly shaped and then there was a
movement once we could bring computers
and we noticed that some galaxies were
far apart from each others others were
closer others were like just touching
said wait a minute suppose we simulate
two galaxies colliding oh what would
that look like Galaxy set all of a
sudden galaxies were train wrecks and
then these objects in the catalog came
to life right so they weren't a
different kind of object they would just
so as as uh one of my mentors Gerard
deur said these uh you know a Lexus
that's been in an accident is not a
different kind of Lexus it's still a
Lexus very that was so that was an
entire branch of our field that was
resolved and and burgeoned into a whole
understanding of colliding galaxies
because of computational astrophysics I
think the history of how Stars evolve
and the lifetime of stars was really the
first big Triumph of computational
astrophysics okay this actually goes
back to the 50s and 60s the very first
computers MH were able to take a
military and scientist had the first
computers right take a star like the sun
right and the laws of physics we
understood but they were complicated
laws we couldn't do the full
calculations by hand and evolve them
forward and describe what happened and
then that matches the patterns we see in
our galaxy there you go and this gives
you the confidence right what because
the laws of physics are everywhere
they're going to be the same they're
going to be the same so you run run it
so you run the simulations they match up
and you're like okay we're on to it we
got it that's really cool so that's the
first part is as it takes
Theory and supercharges it lets you do
calculations you couldn't do before one
a quick add here one of my colleagues in
my department here does computational
astrophysics but he specializes in
gas like it's one thing to have a star
and a Galaxy and this but gas and
amorphous gas which is how do you so
much more yeah how do you model we to
model that right cuz it's not discret
objects it's a Continuum of medium and
so that's a whole other thing it's gas
and it's filled with Magnetic
fields and there's explosions
propagating through it shock waves shock
so it's it's really rich physics and
we're still struggling to understand it
with our simulations and of course the
other piece is observations so David
what is the latest understanding of the
Dark Matter problem which has been with
us for nearly a hundred years so we
don't know what makes up most of our
universe okay that's it we're done
here you heard it here first Adams make
up about four or 5% of the universe mhm
mhm we're made of atoms and we're made
of atoms everything we see is made of
atoms dark
matter is five times as much of it it's
something that's there we sense its
gravitational effects okay we don't know
what it is so I wanted to Lobby to call
it dark gravity because that's what it
literally is because you don't know if
it's matter if you otherwise can't
interact with it we don't know if it's
matter it acts like matter no in the
sense that when it experiences gravity
it clusters so we see cluster in
galaxies we see it behave wait wait wait
wait what do you mean is clustering in
galaxies if it's five times the matter
we see it's the galaxies that are
clustering in it it makes up most of the
mass of our galaxy when we see Its
Behavior in different ways it's behaving
it experiences gravity it falls it
generates gravity but it also
experiences gravity so that's
everything's like that star the Earth
right
experien gravity we can see the Earth
the sun feels us right this has been the
history of science you know we felt the
gravitational effects of
Neptune we didn't know it was there yet
we then went out we this very Royal we
here because he's talking about the
planet Uranus we felt the effects of we
Uranus Uranus effect of and we being
astronomers in the 19th century who did
the
calculations realized it was there saw
it m and then Mercury we also noticed it
was experiencing something
weird and in fact they thought maybe hey
an idea worked once let's try it again
they predicted the existence of the
planet Vulcan yeah we've done a whole
show on Vulcan we're Vulcan fans here
and turns out it's not Vulcan it's
general relativity so we don't know what
dark matter is it a name we're using to
describe some new particle that we
haven't seen yet right or is a name that
we're using to describe the fact that
general relativity is breaking down and
we need something beyond beyond that we
just don't know so you were not very
helpful in this question I thought you
had an answer what we have learned is
what Dark Matter isn't okay oh that's a
start that's a start yeah yeah so you
know this is kind of like Sherlock
Holmes so so it's not it's not black
holes it's not black holes and I I
attended a lecture you gave one time and
you also gave evidence that it's not
lost socks it's not lost socks okay it
is I draw I have like four or five socks
but they don't have what's the deal with
the one sock okay it is not like bunch
of rocks it's not you know we know we've
eliminated a whole bunch of things it's
not a massive nutrino we've just kind of
gone working our way through the list of
things we know
it's good to eliminate you know that's
how you figure stuff out you eliminate
possibilities until you figure out
what's there right as Sherlock Holmes
did right exactly and then dark matter
is just the beginning right there's also
dark energy energy which is energy
associated with empty space mhm and it
dominates the universe we determine its
fate and we don't know what it is and it
means space ain't all that empty that's
right look at that so what else has
Simon done with his money so one of the
things we're building in Chile we just
got first light and Chile is a country
that happens to lay right on the and
Mountain the Andes Mountains so in Chile
means it's up in the Andes mountains
yeah so it's at 17,000 ft ouch great
elevation really high dry sight where
we're studying just to be clear kek is
at 14,000 ft this is higher than the K
telescope on Mona Hawaii so we're using
that to study the leftover heat for the
Big Bang ooh the microwave background
excellent and we'll be using this to if
we're lucky we will detect gravitational
waves from very beginning yeah wow and
learn more about how the universe began
okay but at 70,000 ft no one's breathing
any air there so it's all service
observing no you 177,000 you go up and
you bring an oxygen tank look at that um
everybody up there looks like they're in
a nursing home okay all right Ming
through oh I got to tell you so one of
the things that being an altitude is
you're dumber and you don't know it wow
so people at altitude that is when
there's you're have less oxygen because
yeah you're oxygen deprived you're
oxygen deprived so you have these things
where people are working at the
telescope and they're telling you what
you do they're doing but they're
communicating with people back at sea
level and they're like giving you really
stupid suggestions and you turn to them
and say can you add five and seven for
me and they're like yes yeah and it's
cupcake it's like I think one of us is
an altitude let's think about this some
more take a hit on some oxygen so it
already has first light so we got first
light will be starting to collect data
start the science run soon okay we will
be looking for these gravitational waves
we will also measure in much more detail
the patterns of polarization and
temperature we see in the microwave
background that'll let us determine the
age of the universe its composition yeah
um to a much higher wait but you're not
a ligo type Arrangement so you're going
to detect a gravitational wave is this
is not the observatory where you're
going to look at the wave move across
pulsars and see the timing difference
nope that's yet another way of seeing
gravitational can you can you think of
that that's actually seeing the wave
yeah seeing the wave move from here to
there affecting the data that comes back
from puls as opposed to Lio we detected
it wash over wash over but here we're
going to watch watch it go Universe
there some clever people out there dude
so what we're doing is we're using the
early universe itself right as a
gravitational wave detector that's
amazing so the gravitational wave comes
along it moved
electrons 13.8 billion years ago those
electrons because they're moving scatter
light in a predicted po polarized
pattern and we look we look out in space
we look back in time so we're looking
back seeing how gravitational waves mve
matter around 13.8 billion years ago
I I don't understand how you cannot love
science when you hear this kind of stuff
how can you sit and go oh you know who
cares like what is your problem okay
that is unbelievable so it's a ever way
that involves a completely different
scheme to detect a gravitational wave
right than than means we're detecting
gravitational waves whose wavelengths
are comparable to the size of the
[Laughter]
[Music]
universe jeez okay and that lets us know
about the beginning when Chuck we go
Chuck goes up three octav we know we we
he blew a gasket because it's always so
simple it's like it's so profoundly and
brilliantly simple but yet like
beautifully and elegantly complex at the
same time it's unbelievable okay I think
we have enough brain filling here for a
day amazing from Aliens to wavelengths
the size of the universe yeah uh I think
we're full for a while when you think of
Science of course you think of
scientists sometimes burning the
midnight oil or even collaborating uh
coming up with a new idea a new
observation a new measurement and
occasionally if it's really different
and groundbreaking it makes the
news and this is our general
understanding of what science is and how
it unfolds however if you part the
curtains somewhere back there there are
agencies there are organizations there
are funding streams that enable the
science in the first place when I say
I'm a NASA scientist if I to say that
that means there's money back there
voted on by Congress members of Congress
voted into office by the public that is
the point of origin of the funding that
enables it in the first place and
so when you hear about science funding
agencies I want you to think of them as
fundamental as the science itself
because without them there is no science
yeah you can be in your garage I suppose
but lately not much happens in anybody's
garage science the greatest of science
that unfolds today are major
collaborations with telescopes and
particle detectors and collaborations
that are not only domestic but
International and so it's the ju toos of
those two that make science
move and that is a cosmic perspective
all right Dave it's a delight to see you
again Chuck always good always a
pleasure all right this is Star Talk
wheel the grass Tyson as always bidding
you to keep looking up
[Music]